well let's
get
back here temporarily just briefly and then he got
a job
with um
which was taken over by Sun Oil,
and he became the vice president of Sun Oil in
charge of research. It
was about that time they were beginning catalytic
cracking.
Sun Oil was the first one to have catalytic
cracking. They had batch units,
multiple tanks in which they...
Bets. B-E-T-T-S. Bets units? Is that what they
were calling it? What kind of unit? The Bets unit?
No, a batch. Batch unit. I'm sorry. Batch unit.
Okay. Yeah, right. Okay. Okay. And then later they
went on to continue to flow. Okay.
Now can you shut your thing off? Yes, sir. Just
briefly. But anyway, I could go and tell you lots of
stories about you, but it's not relevant. No, it
isn't, but I'd like to talk to you about it someday.
It's really interesting. We have a man here with
us. with me in 56 down there, Gabriel Oliver. And
he's been teaching here for A&M, but he taught at
Prairie View for many years. And he was
there when I was there in 56. He was going to teach
physics.
But then when I came back,
It was around Christmas of 59. Well, it was after
the first year. It was right after the first year in
60 when Castro already became . And then Pillar at
the University of Houston heard about me and had
this job down in Ecuador and offered me. That job
was supposed to be for two years. Then at Emmington
it took three years, where I spent two years there.
Did you enjoy that? Very, very much so. We built up
the chemical engineering department there. Set
up a laboratory and taught people to teach.
Organized the teaching of
it. But it was more, there was a lot of politics
involved down there. We were in competition with
the University of Michigan that had a unit in
Quito. And they were setting up chemical
engineering in Quito. So we were in competition.
Was the federal government involved in this? Yes.
The University of Houston had a contract. A&M had a
contract with India.
They
went over there. It was
just an educational contract with the country.
I was paid by the University of Houston, but they in
turn charged a gun month for my salary, and
everything was spent. It was a project.
Frank Tiller was the one in charge of it. That
should have been a good experience. So you stayed
there in... Just about three years. About three.
You came back here in 63? Came back Christmas of 63.
And started teaching in the spring? I came back,
yeah, spring term.
If I had stayed any longer down there, they
wouldn't have hired me back then. Yeah, I know. I
had to take a physical when I came back. Did you?
Yeah. In the 60s now at A&M, I know it's hard to get,
you know, sort out the time frame, but is there
anything special going on in chemical
engineering or with people or hiring? There was a
lot of new hiring, wasn't there, about that time?
Yeah. In 63, 64, all the way through the 60s, I
guess. Well, they hired one or two.
I don't remember when
all along in there, back there, Dick Davison, Dr.
Davison. Yeah, I talked to him. And Ron Darby.
Yeah, I talked to Ron. And Leo Durbin came in. Yeah,
Leo Durbin. And they were the only ones there up
even through the 60s. Okay. Well, now, we did have
some other people came in and left
intermittently. Yeah. Felt them in a flat. who
went to work for the nuclear plant up in
Washington.
And another fellow who became the editor of the Oil
and Gas Journal. Oh, okay. And I can't remember his
name off the end. They came in with Kirkbride,
about Kirkbride's
career. I don't know if they were his graduate
students or two, but they became There was really a
big, hot market for chemical engineers about that
time. Yes, there was. And then there was another
one
that went to work for Dow here. He was a graduate and
taught graduate work in collective research. And
he was here for a year or two, and then we went to Dow.
I'm going to go through all the catalogs. I haven't
done that yet. Yeah. And then when I retired, just
about the time I retired, they hired your
president, Ray Anthony. And you retired in what
year? 1974. 1974, yeah. When I retired, they hired
right away three people, or four people. Never
failed.
Hanson came in about that time. He was there before
I retired. And I think Ray Anthony was there just
before I retired.
I think he came in about 64 or 65 or something like
that. by Dan Hanson and Ray Anthony. And they're
the only ones outside of me. And Bill Harris, of
course, is part of it. Now, Bill Harris took his
master's degree. Harris is part of the master's
degree. Oh, is that right? Yeah, he told me about
it. Yeah. And then they got a doctorate degree up in
University of Colorado. One year, he said. One
year of work. That was a tough year. Did
you, over time, see much change in the way chemical
engineering was being—I don't know if this is the
right word—what was changing in the field, in the
profession of chemical engineering? You said
there was a broad How have things changed since you
entered the business? We had the teaching of it,
yes. I can go way back to when I was taking chemical
engineering. We took laboratories. In our
freshman year, we took even a foundry
and a pipe thinning course. Oh, good. a machine
shop course in my freshman year. We had three
semesters. There's a quarter of the system up
there. And then of course, when I came down here, of
course, our students took mechanical
engineering and civil engineering courses.
Testing, laboratory testing, and strength of
materials, and even the and thermodynamics
course in mechanical
engineering, and mechanical
engineering laboratory. And those have been
dropped. They don't take those laboratory
courses anymore. And they have reduced, when I was
in chemical engineering, We had experiments in
chemical processing, as well as distillation,
filtration, and we made chemicals.
And after that, we made tri-sodium phosphate,
showed them how to crystallize it out and purify
it. And we made some dyes, and we made soap.
Yeah. We conducted fermentation with lactic
acid. In those days, a good deal of the chemicals
were made by fermentation.
But down here then, we had no processing, and we had
our unit operations. And we had a very
good setup, distillation, filtration, and some
of the rest of them. The computer came in, and we
began to optimize things on the computer. Way back
there, over the years, we did pretty well in the
yearly AICHE problems.
Our students did very well in those problems. And
then, of course, they'll probably begin to use
computers. And now the students don't feel like,
for example, K-transfer, dyslexia very much.
They just have a computer problem. And it's hard to
understand what's taking place.
Now, just before I retired, I had a job with with
Anderson Clayton, in which I designed the
recovery system for ethyl
alcohol. And they contracted it badly.
And I went over there and
studied the plan. I climbed the tower and operated
the valves. And I don't think these students could
do that. Yeah. And so it's much more theoretical,
much more... It's too theoretical. Yeah. Yes.
It's a lot less hands-on. They don't get enough
hands-on knowledge of what's actually taking
place physically. Yeah. Yeah, I've heard. I did a
history of Johnson Space Center for NASA. And that
was a common complaint, you know, that engineers
now are just a different breed of cat. That's
right. And they really don't have the feel in a way,
which is almost a physical thing, for materials
and design and whatever it was that they were
working with. And including aeronautical
engineers they were really talking about. You
just have to get in there and feel the material in
order to make it work. And now it's all done on
computers and and very abstract. And the old
timers especially are not convinced this is the
way it always is. And I think they have a good point,
frankly. And if the system ever broke down, you
wonder what would happen then. That's right.
Because you don't have that basic knowledge.
Well, I'll tell you, when we got unit out of the lab,
then we would kind of slip around and open up a valve
to the sewer arm before they had started the
operation. And then he said, well, get this thing
off-riding. And it wouldn't work. And it wouldn't
work. You'd have to hunt and hunt and find out what
was wrong with it. Yeah. It's a good experience.
That's what it's all about. Now, even
up at Iowa State,
Doc Sweeney was in the quiz and said, well, how big
is that motor on that driver over there? What size
is it? And
why did it take less power when you were running it
when it was running idle? The
power factor was off when it was idle, so it
indicated more power. Well, things like that that
we had to... Really challenge it, yeah. Yeah,
yeah. Incidentally, before I get away from here,
what... Let's see, Dean Benson. How was he as a
dean? He made a very good dean because he was
hard-headed and he wouldn't put up with any
nonsense. And he did push things quite well. Now,
I got along fine with him.
I would go in when Holland was not available. I
would go in to the Dean's meetings and work with
him. But he was okay. He has a peculiarity
in that he doesn't seem to recognize people.
Benson? Benson. You meet him on the street, you
don't know whether he knows you or not. Knows
you're not, yeah. But I think he's having trouble
now, that way. Even before that, I think maybe
we'll say Dr. Lindsay and he happened to be on the
same plane coming back from Washington. Well,
maybe he didn't even know. Paying attention to
Lindsay, although he was right there. That was the
way he was. Kind of distracting, yeah.
Let's see. But anyway, he was a good dean. Yeah. I'm
trying to think of anything you think that, if you
were going to write a history of the Department of
Chemical Engineering in your time, what would you
think would be the most important thing that needs
to be said?
That's a big question. Well, I think you've got the
right idea, pretty well, in terms of doing how
chemical engineering changed through the years
along with the change in the department. Not just
the history of the department, but the change in
chemical engineering. That's a very good way to
look at it.
When I was here, I started, of course, the drawing
department. Here's another thing they don't do
anymore. We had two visits, company visits. out in
the fall term and visit one or two or two or three
plants for a week. Okay. So you learn a lot in a week
on the ground. Yeah. We would go to different
plants. One time we would go, say, to Port Arthur
and Beaumont area and we'd take in those plants
over there. Another time, say, we went to East
Texas and Dallas. We went to the Paper Mill, the
foundry up there in Luckton. Yeah, right. And then
we went to Dallas and took in, well, we also went to
Mr. Tucker's Foods up in Sherbrooke. And
to make the bridge wall plant in Dallas. And then we
went as far south as Papa's Crispy. and visited the
Selenese plants down there. And, of course, we
went down and we'd take in the Houston area quite a
bit. We'd go to Dowell, Selenese, and Bishop, or
whatever it was. And so we would take in those
plants, and that was very good. The students got to
look at them. see what was going on. But they don't
do that anymore. And when I was in Ecuador, I took
the students through the paper mill and the
refinery hall. They had not paper mills, but sugar
mills. They had two big sugar mills down there.
Yeah, you know, I was kind of reading about
background on the history of chemical
engineering. One of the first programs in
chemical engineering was at Tulane University in
New Orleans, and it was sugar, sugar related. Now
the two that ran the sugar mill, the sugar
operation outside of New Orleans, they were from
A&M, and they had taken chemical engineering on
them. They owned it. They owned it. He took
chemical engineering. I don't know whether he
took it here or not. I think he took it here. But I'm
not sure. And of course, I went into chemical
engineering. That's right. And in fact, what I'm
going to try to do is do a little flashback in
history and say the basic processes in chemical
engineering usually have to do with
distillation, fermentation. What else would I
have to talk about? There used to be a plant, a
company called Commercial Solvents. Did you ever
hear of it? I want to say I did, but I don't know if I
did or not. Well, they made their solvents by
fermentation. Yeah. Brutal alcohol, or butyric
acid, or pesticides, different ethyl alcohol,
all that was made by fermentation. Yeah. And then,
of course, the petroleum products came in, and
they made ethyl alcohol from petroleum cheaper.
And these solvents were synthesized from
petroleum byproducts, we'll say, from ethylene
and propylene and methyl alcohol and carbon
monoxide and so forth. They were all made cheaper
from petroleum than by fermentation. Now, I know
way back, they were going to use ethyl alcohol in
gasoline. in Iowa, years when I was up there. We had
been going practically nothing but buy alcohol
and put it in our gasoline. Well, I put it in my
radiator. That made good sense too, didn't it?
Yeah. It was the nature. But, uh, well Doc Sweeney
was trying to get them to make alcohol with corn.
You can make two and a half gallons per bushel of
corn. Well, that made it much more expensive than
making it for patrol from that point. So that's how
the chemical industry began to develop. We had the
basics like alkali, chlorine, sulfur and
sulfuric acid, all of those, and fertilizers,
phosphoric acid. began to grow here. Yeah. So
that's kind of what I was, that all of these
processes of this daily life sort of conglomerate
and provide the basic impetus for chemical
engineering here. It might have been a little more
agriculture maybe than in other places, but
petroleum here, agriculture here, I guess would
be the big impetus to it. But then... These are
basic processes that are used everywhere, and
they'll always be used. One thing that did help was
during the war when Dow came down here and made
metal
magnesium. Okay. And time. I wonder why that
happened.
What, a shaft? No, I've got a... Magnesium shaft on
a gun? No, I made a putter out of magnesium that was
made by Dow back in 19... way when they had that
magnesium. They gave us some slugs of magnesium
and they laid in the department for a long time and I
cut a piece off and made a putter head and I've used
it ever since. But anyway... Well, that's awful
light. It's really light. It's a big head. That's
why I like it. It's a high putter. I'm not a golfer,
but they're going back to that big head. I don't
know what they're using in those big putters now.
One reason for the big head, I guess, is the entire
moment of immersion. You don't... If you hit it a
little off center, why, it doesn't hurt the top so
much. But...
there you've got fiberglass you've got so much in
the way of polymers yeah after they i got part of it
well i tell you what i like